---
layout: post
title: WASM32-GSL
date: 2022-04-24 18:16 -0500
---
One goal of chlib is to be able to compile it natively on macOS, Linux, and Windows. I also want to be able to compile
the code to WASM so I can use it with JavaScript in the web environment. Since chlib will fall under the scientific
programming and computing domain, I want to find a scientific library to use. I'm writing chlib in C and the scientific
library will have to be compatible, so I'm going with [GSL](https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/).

At first I thought I would have to take pieces of GSL and compile them along with my project. This is the route I took
at first. [This is the last commit](https://github.com/mmdski/chlib/tree/2fb212b7fb08dd665f3399f62a5b1c1082549ac7)
in chlib where I had GSL as a Meson subproject. Since I figured out how to compile GSL as an independent static library,
I removed the subproject since keeping GSL separate will be easier on me in the future. I've created a project on
GitHub, which is named [wasm32-gsl](https://github.com/mmdski/wasm32-gsl), that has some simple notes to myself on how
to cross-compile and install GSL as a WASM32 library. After GSL is compiled and installed, the wasm32-gsl project can be
compiled and linked with GSL. After compiling, the resulting JavaScript file can be executed with Node.js. The example
files come from the GSL project. I plan on adding more examples as I move forward with implementing chlib.

I did have some issues while I was trying to figure out how to cross-compile GSL and link a program with it. First,
Emscripten didn't want to compile the library because I believe it contains shared libraries by default. Thanks to [this
post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/67159161/how-to-compile-the-c-gnu-scientific-library-gsl-to-web-assembly-using-emscript/67169806#67169806)
on Stack Overflow, I found that adding `LDFLAGS=-all-static` to the Make command gets Emscripten to correctly compile
GSL.

Then, I had a hard time getting pkg-config to find the WASM version of the library. Unfortunately, at the moment I can't
find the file that lead me to the solution, but I'll update this post if I come across it again. (edit: [here it
is](https://github.com/hartenfels/meson-emscripten-example/blob/master/cross/emscripten.cross).) The solution is to wrap
pkg-config with emmake and set up the `PKG_CONFIG_LIBDIR` environment variable during the call. `PKG_CONFIG_LIBDIR`
needs to contain the directory that has the information for pkg-config to find the location of a library and
corresponding header files. I initially wanted to set up a WASM32 directory in my home directory, but I wasn't able to
get emmake to expand my home path using the `HOME` environment variable. I'm not sure if it's because the Meson cross
file doesn't allow that or what. Since I wasn't able to point emmake to my home directory, I set up the install so the
library is installed in /usr/local/wasm32. Wrapping pkg-config and passing the environment variable takes place on [line
4 of the Meson cross
file](https://github.com/mmdski/wasm32-gsl/blob/03adfe759f4849a160d22e36a29b10f7b4372dbf/wasm32.ini#L4).

Having a cross-compiled GSL that I can link cross-compiled projects to will allow me to install and/or compile versions
of GSL for native builds. Keeping GSL separate from my project will make it much easier on me in the future since I
won't have to maintain the GSL code.
